---
author: miles
categories:
- tutorial
featured: false
hidden: false
categories: [ statistics ]
image: assets/images/2023-09-15-linreg/example.png
output:
  html_document: default
  md_document:
    variant: gfm
  pdf_document: default
title: Linear Regression (The basics)
---


You've probably come across linear regression from time to time in your
research, or in reading papers -- but how does it work? What **is**
linear regression? What are the assumptions behind it? How do I do it?
We're going to hit on the basics of all those questions in this tutorial
right here.

## Table of Contents

-   Introduction: [What is linear
    regression?](#what-is-linear-regression)
    -   [Linear regression form](#linear-regression-form)
    -   [When should we use linear
        regression?](#when-should-we-use-linear-regression)
    -   [How does linear regression
        work?](#how-does-linear-regression-work)
    -   [What are the assumptions behind linear
        regression?](#what-are-the-assumptions-behind-linear-regression)
-   [Linear regression how-tos](#how-to):
    -   [How to set up your data](#data-setup)
    -   [How to code your model](#model-code)
        -   sklearn
        -   statsmodels
-   Interpreting Linear Regression
    -   [go talk to
        kevin](https://dibsmethodsmeetings.github.io/contrasts/)

## What is linear regression?

<a id='what-is-linear-regression'></a>

### A way of modeling relationships between variables

Oftentimes in our research, we're interested in understanding the
relationship between independent variables and dependent variables.
Linear regression lets us describe that relationship! It's just one of
many ways of modeling relationships, but in many ways is one of the
simplest, easiest to implement, most commonly found, and is usually:
good enough for all your modeling needs.

### Linear regression form

<a id='linear-regression-form'></a> For the form of linear regression,
we're going to reach back into our memories and bring back
slope-intercept form from our geometry classes back in the day. For a
refresher, slope-intercept is:

*y* = *mx* + *b*

Where *m* is the slope, and *b* is the intercept. In our linear
regression, *x* is our independent variable, or our predictor, and *y*
is our dependent variable, or outcome. We're modeling the relationship
between the two as **linear**: assuming that you can draw a straight
line to relate predictors to outcomes. In research & modeling, the slope
and intercept are typically known as *β* weights, and the above formula
is written as:

*y* = *β*<sub>1</sub>*x* + *β*<sub>0</sub>

Because of this, we'll be using *β* to mark and describe our **linear
regression weights**

### When should we use linear regression?

<a id='when-should-we-use-linear-regression'></a> Linear regression is a
great tool for a lot of things - if we're just starting a new set of
data analysis, basic linear regression can be a way to explore
relationships in our data. If we're deeper in our analyses, we can use
linear regression to test if linear relationships exist in our data. We
can use this for both continuous and categorical predictors. However, if
we have categorical output variables, there are usually better options
(that I won't cover here, but you can look up **logistic regression**
and **multinomial regression** if you want more information)

### How does linear regression work?

<a id='how-does-linear-regression-work'></a> I said before that linear
regression models the relationship between predictors and outcomes - but
how does it do that? How does it find our slope-intercept form? It does
so by finding the slope and intercept that minimize error between
predictions and true outcomes. We have our estimate:

*ŷ* = *β*<sub>1</sub>*x* + *β*<sub>0</sub>

and the best values of *β*<sub>1</sub>, *β*<sub>0</sub> are those that
minimize (*ŷ*−*y*)<sup>2</sup>. If we have multiple data points (as we
usually do in most datasets), linear regression minimizes that error
**on average** across the whole dataset.

*but what happens if there **isn't** a linear relationship in our data?
what does linear regression do then?*

Great question! The best option for linear regression is then to find
**no** relationship between x and y: a slope of zero. This is why linear
regression is great for finding these relationships, and also for
finding a lack of these relationships. Now, our data are noisy, so we
might find a relationship by chance. But luckily, thanks to the
assumptions behind linear regression, we can do statistical tests to
determine if our estimates are *actually* different from zero.

### What are the assumptions behind linear regression?

<a id='what-are-the-assumptions-behind-linear-regression'></a> There are
four main assumptions behind linear regression:

1.  Linear relationship in data
2.  Independence of residuals (errors)
    -   there should be no correlation between errors in our model at
        different values of *x*
3.  Homoscedasticity
    -   annoying to spell, not as complicated as it sounds: The variance
        of your errors should be the same at all values of *ŷ*
4.  Normality
    -   your errors should have a normal distribution for all values of
        *x*

There are tests you can do for all of these assumptions - I'm not going
to go into them here since there isn't time, BUT! we may have that in an
upcoming session.

These assumptions come from the setup of linear regression: We assume
typically that there is a *deterministic* relationship between *x* and
*y* that is corrupted by independent, normally distributed noise; in
math terms: *y* = *β*<sub>1</sub>*x* + *β*<sub>0</sub> + *ϵ*, where *ϵ*
is the Gaussian noise. Based on these assumptions, we can generally use
t-tests to determine if what we learn (our coefficients, *m* and *b*)
are significantly different from zero! And software typically does this
on the backend, so you personally don't have to worry about it.

## Linear Regression How-to's

<a id='how-to'></a> This is all great but not at all helpful for
actually using linear regression. How do we do that in Python?

There are two main libraries to use for linear regression; one is more
data science/exploration centered, the other is more stats-y and
science-y because it does all those statistical tests I just mentioned
for you. We'll start with the data science-y version, then move on to
the science-y version towards the end for more complex models. But
first, a dataset! We'll be using the dataset from [Kevin's wonderful
regression interpretation
tutorial](https://dibsmethodsmeetings.github.io/contrasts/), implemented
in Python this time. It requires pandas, numpy, itertools, random, and
scipy to run! Long story short, this is simulating a stroop task where
we have a few independent variables (stimulus color, condition \[same or
different\],color saturation), and our dependent variable of interest
here is response time (RT).

    import pandas as pd
    import numpy as np
    from itertools import product
    import random
    from scipy.stats import logistic

    np.random.seed(2023)
    colors= ['red','blue','green']
    data_setup = {
        'participant': list(range(1,26)),
        'trial': list(range(1,26)),
        'condition': ['same','different']

    }

    df = pd.DataFrame(pd.DataFrame([row for row in product(*data_setup.values())],
                           columns=data_setup.keys()))
    df['color'] = random.choices(colors,k=len(df))#,replace=True)
    df['saturation'] = np.random.uniform(size=len(df))
    df['participant'], participants = pd.factorize(df.participant)
    df['text'] = df.apply(lambda x: x.color if x.condition=='same'
                          else random.choice([c for c in colors if c != x.color]),axis=1)
    df['means'] = df.saturation.apply(lambda x: 3 + 0.4*np.random.randn() - x * (0.5 + 0.2*np.random.randn()))
    df['effects'] = df.saturation.apply(lambda x: .3 + x*(0.25 + np.random.randn()*0.2))
    df['RT'] = df.apply(lambda x: x.means if x.condition =='same' else x.means + x.effects,axis=1)
    df['correct'] = df.apply(lambda x: np.random.binomial(
            n=1,p = logistic.cdf(x.means - 2.8 + 3*x.saturation*logistic.cdf(x.effects)))
                            if x.condition == 'same' else
                            np.random.binomial(
            n=1,p = logistic.cdf(x.means - 2.8 + x.saturation*logistic.cdf(x.effects))),axis=1)
    df['response'] = df.apply(lambda x: x.color if x.correct else x.text,axis=1)
    df = df.drop(['means','effects'],axis=1)

    df.head()

       participant  trial  condition  color  saturation  text        RT  correct  \
    0            0      1       same    red    0.321988   red  2.762421        1
    1            0      1  different  green    0.890422   red  2.559627        1
    2            0      2       same   blue    0.588052  blue  3.249825        1
    3            0      2  different  green    0.126596   red  3.056826        0
    4            0      3       same    red    0.141341   red  3.062615        1

      response
    0      red
    1    green
    2     blue
    3      red
    4      red

Okay! We have our data! But we're not quite done yet. Before we fit
linear regression, there are a few things that are generally good to do
to

## Set up our data

<a id='data-setup'></a> The biggest thing that we want to do when we're
fitting linear regression is to *standardize our data*. What do I mean
by that?

1.  We typically want our data to have a mean of zero Why is this good?
    Well, if our data has a mean of zero, it means that our slope
    coefficient represents the relationship of *deviations from the mean
    value* of predictors to the outcome. This also gives the intercept
    the interpretation of the outcome variable at the mean value of our
    predictors. We can make this change by subtracting the mean value
    from all of our predictors.

This is a little less important if we can have a point of zero for our
variables. Really what we need is a reference point for us to base our
interpretations off of!

1.  We want our data to be on the same scale This lets us interpret our
    coefficients relative to each other. This becomes more important the
    more predictors we have, but can also be important in the single
    linear regression case! This is often done by (after
    mean-subtracting), dividing by the standard deviation of each
    variable. This lets us simplify the relationship between our
    predictor and our outcome, such that the coefficient for our
    predictor indicates the number of standard deviation changes in the
    outcome that occur when the predictor changes by one standard
    deviation.

There are other ways we could think about standardizing (such as
dividing by a maximum value to give us a scale of 0-1), but this type of
normalization is the most common and one of the easiest to do!

We can combine the above-two steps to get the following variables!

    df['saturation_std'] = (df.saturation - df.saturation.mean())/df.saturation.std()
    df['RT_std'] = (df.RT - df.RT.mean())/df.RT.std()

    df.head()

       participant  trial  condition  color  saturation  text        RT  correct  \
    0            0      1       same    red    0.321988   red  2.762421        1
    1            0      1  different  green    0.890422   red  2.559627        1
    2            0      2       same   blue    0.588052  blue  3.249825        1
    3            0      2  different  green    0.126596   red  3.056826        0
    4            0      3       same    red    0.141341   red  3.062615        1

      response  saturation_std    RT_std
    0      red       -0.657775 -0.404780
    1    green        1.388385 -0.821485
    2     blue        0.299960  0.596750
    3      red       -1.361117  0.200171
    4      red       -1.308039  0.212067

## Coding our model

<a id='model-code'></a>

Let's start off with the simplest model possible: One where we're only
going to fit the intercept term. Let's use sklearn, the exploratory code
base, to fit this model! We can use our pandas arrays directly, but
sklearn is used for big data typically so it requires data with multiple
columns to work. The code below will just fit an intercept - which comes
out to the average RT of your whole dataset! We can compare how this
model looks when fit to our standardized data vs. our original data.

    from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression as lm
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    interceptModel = lm().fit(X=np.zeros((len(df),1)),y=df.RT)
    interceptModelStandardized = lm().fit(X=np.zeros((len(df),1)),y=df.RT_std)
    print(f"Model intercept: {interceptModel.intercept_}, RT Mean: {df.RT.mean()}")
    print(f"standardized model intercept: {interceptModelStandardized.intercept_}")

    Model intercept: 2.959411092750972, RT Mean: 2.959411092750977
    standardized model intercept: -1.0464873412274756e-14

What about fitting to the other variable that we standardized:
saturation?

    saturationModel = lm().fit(X=df.loc[:,['saturation']],y=df.RT)
    standardizedSaturationModel = lm().fit(X=df.loc[:,['saturation_std']],y=df.RT)
    doubleStandardizedModel = lm().fit(X=df.loc[:,['saturation_std']],y=df.RT_std)

    print(f"Saturation model coefs: intercept = {saturationModel.intercept_}, saturation weight={saturationModel.coef_}")
    print(f"Standardized saturation model coefs: intercept = {standardizedSaturationModel.intercept_}, saturation weight={standardizedSaturationModel.coef_}")
    print(f"Double standardized model coefs: intercept = {doubleStandardizedModel.intercept_}, saturation weight={doubleStandardizedModel.coef_}")

    Saturation model coefs: intercept = 3.1889239564626135, saturation weight=[-0.45473154]
    Standardized saturation model coefs: intercept = 2.959411092750972, saturation weight=[-0.12632688]
    Double standardized model coefs: intercept = -1.0303301823700729e-14, saturation weight=[-0.25957968]

What's the interpretation of all these above coefficients?

And how'd our model do? Let's find out:

    ax = plt.gca()

    ax.scatter(df.saturation_std,df.RT_std,color='r',label='Data')
    ax.scatter(df.saturation_std,
               doubleStandardizedModel.predict(X=df.loc[:,['saturation_std']]),
               color='b',label='Model predictions')
    ax.set_xlabel("Saturation (z-scored)")
    ax.set_ylabel("RT (z-scored)")
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()
    plt.close()

<img src="/assets/images/2023-09-15-linreg/saturation_model.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />


We can also fit a model to our categorical variables, such that we can
see if there's a difference in RT between the same and different
conditions. To do so, we need to set up a dummy variable for our
condition, then fit the linear model.

    df['conditionDummy'], uniques = pd.factorize(df.condition)
    print(uniques)
    conditionModel = lm().fit(X=df.loc[:,['conditionDummy']],y=df.RT)


    ax = plt.gca()

    ax.scatter(df.conditionDummy,df.RT,color='r',label='Data')
    ax.scatter(df.conditionDummy,
               conditionModel.predict(X=df.loc[:,['conditionDummy']]),
               color='b',label='Model predictions')
    ax.set_xticks([0,1])
    ax.set_xticklabels(list(uniques))
    ax.set_xlabel("Condition")
    ax.set_ylabel("RT")
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()
    plt.close()

    Index(['same', 'different'], dtype='object')
    2.7520304353801066
    [0.41476131]

<img src="/assets/images/2023-09-15-linreg/condition_model.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

If we want a library that does statistical testing and lets us specify
some more complicated formulas (and then take care of the work that
entails on the backend), we can use statsmodels! This lets us extend our
linear models to the realm of interactions using some R-friendly syntax.

    import statsmodels.api as sm
    import statsmodels.formula.api as smf

    results = smf.ols('RT ~ 1', data=df).fit() # original intercept model!!
    print(results.summary())
    results2 = smf.ols('RT ~ 1 + saturation',data=df).fit() # saturation model!!!
    print(results2.summary())

                                OLS Regression Results
    ==============================================================================
    Dep. Variable:                     RT   R-squared:                      -0.000
    Model:                            OLS   Adj. R-squared:                 -0.000
    Method:                 Least Squares   F-statistic:                       nan
    Date:                Thu, 14 Sep 2023   Prob (F-statistic):                nan
    Time:                        22:52:00   Log-Likelihood:                -872.93
    No. Observations:                1250   AIC:                             1748.
    Df Residuals:                    1249   BIC:                             1753.
    Df Model:                           0
    Covariance Type:            nonrobust
    ==============================================================================
                     coef    std err          t      P>|t|      [0.025      0.975]
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Intercept      2.9594      0.014    214.998      0.000       2.932       2.986
    ==============================================================================
    Omnibus:                        0.528   Durbin-Watson:                   2.303
    Prob(Omnibus):                  0.768   Jarque-Bera (JB):                0.557
    Skew:                          -0.049   Prob(JB):                        0.757
    Kurtosis:                       2.969   Cond. No.                         1.00
    ==============================================================================

    Notes:
    [1] Standard Errors assume that the covariance matrix of the errors is correctly specified.
                                OLS Regression Results
    ==============================================================================
    Dep. Variable:                     RT   R-squared:                       0.067
    Model:                            OLS   Adj. R-squared:                  0.067
    Method:                 Least Squares   F-statistic:                     90.17
    Date:                Thu, 14 Sep 2023   Prob (F-statistic):           1.07e-20
    Time:                        22:52:00   Log-Likelihood:                -829.33
    No. Observations:                1250   AIC:                             1663.
    Df Residuals:                    1248   BIC:                             1673.
    Df Model:                           1
    Covariance Type:            nonrobust
    ==============================================================================
                     coef    std err          t      P>|t|      [0.025      0.975]
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Intercept      3.1889      0.028    115.595      0.000       3.135       3.243
    saturation    -0.4547      0.048     -9.496      0.000      -0.549      -0.361
    ==============================================================================
    Omnibus:                        0.502   Durbin-Watson:                   2.382
    Prob(Omnibus):                  0.778   Jarque-Bera (JB):                0.431
    Skew:                           0.041   Prob(JB):                        0.806
    Kurtosis:                       3.040   Cond. No.                         4.58
    ==============================================================================

    Notes:
    [1] Standard Errors assume that the covariance matrix of the errors is correctly specified.

The benefit of doing things using statsmodels (in addition to the nice
model description that we get out) is that we can also easily specify
interaction models: things of the form

*y* = *β*<sub>0</sub> + *β*<sub>1</sub>*x*<sub>1</sub> + *β*<sub>2</sub>*x*<sub>2</sub> + *β*<sub>3</sub>*x*<sub>1</sub> \* *x*<sub>2</sub>

    results3 = smf.ols('RT ~ 1 + saturation*condition',data=df).fit() # interaction model!!!
    print(results3.summary())

                                OLS Regression Results
    ==============================================================================
    Dep. Variable:                     RT   R-squared:                       0.260
    Model:                            OLS   Adj. R-squared:                  0.258
    Method:                 Least Squares   F-statistic:                     145.8
    Date:                Thu, 14 Sep 2023   Prob (F-statistic):           5.68e-81
    Time:                        22:52:02   Log-Likelihood:                -684.89
    No. Observations:                1250   AIC:                             1378.
    Df Residuals:                    1246   BIC:                             1398.
    Df Model:                           3
    Covariance Type:            nonrobust
    ================================================================================================
                                       coef    std err          t      P>|t|      [0.025      0.975]
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Intercept                        3.3670      0.035     95.795      0.000       3.298       3.436
    condition[T.same]               -0.3303      0.049     -6.711      0.000      -0.427      -0.234
    saturation                      -0.3893      0.060     -6.480      0.000      -0.507      -0.271
    saturation:condition[T.same]    -0.1856      0.085     -2.172      0.030      -0.353      -0.018
    ==============================================================================
    Omnibus:                        1.395   Durbin-Watson:                   1.975
    Prob(Omnibus):                  0.498   Jarque-Bera (JB):                1.294
    Skew:                           0.038   Prob(JB):                        0.524
    Kurtosis:                       3.138   Cond. No.                         12.0
    ==============================================================================

    Notes:
    [1] Standard Errors assume that the covariance matrix of the errors is correctly specified.

And that just about covers the basics of linear regression in Python! If
you want more information on sklearn's linear regression, you can check
out [sklearn's
documentation](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LinearRegression.html),
and the same for
[statsmodels](https://www.statsmodels.org/dev/example_formulas.html).
For information about interpreting linear regression results, again:
take a look at [Kevin's
tutorial](!https://dibsmethodsmeetings.github.io/contrasts/)!
